docs/worklog.md, before:

# Introduction

Trying to integrate an LLM into Godot, for spicing up NPC chatter.

# Work log

## Part 1

```
mkdir godot-llm-experiment
cd godot-llm-experiment
mkdir src
```

Start here: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html

Conda environment (for scons):

```
ENVNAME=godot-llm-experiment-py311; conda deactivate; conda remove -y --name $ENVNAME --all ; conda create -y -n $ENVNAME python==3.11 ; [ -e .conda ] || echo "conda activate $ENVNAME" > .conda;  source .conda
```

In future, just `source .conda` to continue working.

Install scons:

```
pip install scons
```

Clone the godot-cpp repo:

```
git clone https://github.com/godotengine/godot-cpp.git
cd godot-cpp
git checkout godot-4.1.1-stable
cd ..
```

Build C++ bindings. 

```
cp godot-cpp/gdextension/extension_api.json the-game/extension_api.json
```

Or alternatively, it seems you can generate this file yourself:

```
cd the-game
godot --dump-extension-api extension_api.json
cd ..
```

But I saw differences between the one I created, and the one in the repo. So, I'll use the one in the repo for now.

Continue...

```
cd godot-cpp
scons platform=linux -j31 custom_api_file=$(pwd)/../the-game/extension_api.json
cd ..
```

(takes about 35 seconds on my machine)

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#creating-a-simple-plugin

But I'm calling mine `the-game` instead of `demo`.

Add all the example code (.h and .cpp files).

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#compiling-the-plugin

Download the Scons file. It looks the same as the one here: `godot-cpp/test/SConstruct`
so ignore the warning
> This SConstruct file was written to be used with the latest godot-cpp master, you may need to make small changes using it with older versions or refer to the SConstruct file in the Godot 4.0 documentation.

Run 

```
scons platform=linux
```

Another 35 seconds later, I have: `the-game/bin/libgdexample.linux.template_debug.x86_64.so`

Later, when it's stable, I'll drop debug symbols with a prod build:

```
scons platform=linux target=template_release
```

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#using-the-gdextension-module

Add the GDExample node to the main.tscn scene, et voilà!

## Part 2

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#adding-properties

Add new amplitude and speed properties.

Have this new property reflect in Godot editor with:

```
rm the-game/bin/libgdexample.linux.template_debug.x86_64.so
scons platform=linux
```

Then `Project -> Reload Current Project` in the editor.

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#signals

Add the `position_changed` signal, then reload using the steps above (remove the .so, re-run scons, and reload the project).

Now, if you run the game, you'll see something like this in the logs:

```
The position of GDExample is now (153.6926, 191.1001)
The position of GDExample is now (190.3038, 166.3663)
The position of GDExample is now (199.328, 130.0965)
The position of GDExample is now (178.0086, 88.59532)
The position of GDExample is now (132.8584, 49.07652)
```

## Part 3: the LLM

Try https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1

Mistral announcement: https://mistral.ai/news/announcing-mistral-7b/

At the time of writing, GGUF is the recommended format to use, and the Q5_K_M model is one of TheBloke's recommended models, because it's quality los is very low. (Not sure yet what level of quality we'll need for this use-case, but hey.)

From https://huggingface.co/TheBloke/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1-GGUF/blob/main/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf

``` 
mkdir -p models
cd models
wget https://huggingface.co/TheBloke/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1-GGUF/resolve/main/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf
sha256sum mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf
# c4b062ec7f0f160e848a0e34c4e291b9e39b3fc60df5b201c038e7064dbbdcdc
cd ..
```

A test for the model is in `fine-tune/app.py`:

```
cd fine-tune
python app.py
```

It generates this using CPU:

```
{'thing': 'sketchbook', 'text': '\n\n"Wow, you\'re quite the artist!"'}
Time taken: 1.5295381546020508 seconds
{'thing': 'Xbox controller', 'text': ' "Hey, are you ready for some Gears of War 5 action?"'}
Time taken: 1.4008283615112305 seconds
{'thing': 'pencil', 'text': ' “You’re drawing the line.'}
Time taken: 0.7739419937133789 seconds
{'thing': 'banana', 'text': '\n\n"You\'re not going to use that in your game, are you?"'}
Time taken: 1.456860065460205 seconds
```

("Gears of War 5"? Ooh, we shan't be drawing the attention of the lawyers, now, shall we?)

GPU (which is quicker):

```
ggml_cuda_set_main_device: using device 0 (NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada Generation) as main device
{'thing': 'sketchbook', 'text': ' “You’re an artist!'}
Time taken: 0.26387453079223633 seconds
{'thing': 'Xbox controller', 'text': '\n\n"I see you\'re a fan of the green ring."'}
Time taken: 0.3325464725494385 seconds
{'thing': 'pencil', 'text': ' "Draw me a game!"'}
Time taken: 0.28811216354370117 seconds
{'thing': 'banana', 'text': '\n\n"What\'s the story behind this banana?"'}
Time taken: 0.29184842109680176 seconds
```

LLM stuff to look at:
- I'll experiment more with dialogue soon (for the "spicing up NPC chatter" goal)
- be mindful of not mentioning real product/people names, in case of defamation, etc
- detect GPU/AVX/AVX2 capabilities, and use them if available


# Part 4: It talks! To itself!

See the [chat transcript](chat-transcript.txt) (which is funny, because I've just finished Left Hand Of Darkness last week). The `~~~` is when I refresh the dialogue history so the context doesn't blow up.

A bit rough and ready, but run with:

```
cd fine-tune
python dialogue.py
```

# Part 4: Dialogue cleanup

OK, so it was late last night, and I didn't properly use EOS tokens, so cleaned up a lot of bot responses by hand. But it's way better now, and I've seeded the dialogue so we end up with a pair of right prepper nutters.

See the [chat transcript](chat-transcript2.txt).

It does 60 exchanges in ~50 seconds with GPU.

Remarks:
- same as before: be mindful of mentioning real product/people names
- they tend to get into a "high five" loop, where they keep starting their responses with _"Absolutely!"_, _"Let's do it!"_, etc

# Part 5: using the LLM from C++

Probably the best place to start is https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/tree/master/examples/simple

As I know GDScript better than C++, an as GDScript is kind of like Python already, it might make sense to port `dialogue.py` to GDSCript, and keep the dialogue orchestration code in GDScript.


Let's build the llama.cpp dependencies:

```
git clone https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp.git
cd llama.cpp
make
```

As it builds all the examples, we can test `main` and `simple` right now:

```
./main -m ../models/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf --prompt "Once upon a time"
./simple ../models/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf "Once upon a time"
```
It works, and it writes us a little story [using main](llamacpp-main.txt) and [using simple](llamacpp-simple.txt).

Next, try and build simple.cpp with Scons, as that's what we're using for the Godot plugin.

After piecing together the Scons file, I got it to work:

```
cd llamacpp-main-example-with-scons
scons platform=linux
./simple ../models/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf "Once upon a time"
```

Commit message:

Part 6: put LLM code in GDExtension module

docs/worklog.md, after:

# Work log

## Part 1

```
mkdir godot-llm-experiment
cd godot-llm-experiment
mkdir src
```

Start here: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html

Conda environment (for scons):

```
ENVNAME=godot-llm-experiment-py311; conda deactivate; conda remove -y --name $ENVNAME --all ; conda create -y -n $ENVNAME python==3.11 ; [ -e .conda ] || echo "conda activate $ENVNAME" > .conda;  source .conda
```

In future, just `source .conda` to continue working.

Install scons:

```
pip install scons
```

Clone the godot-cpp repo:

```
git clone https://github.com/godotengine/godot-cpp.git
cd godot-cpp
git checkout godot-4.1.1-stable
cd ..
```

Build C++ bindings. 

```
cp godot-cpp/gdextension/extension_api.json the-game/extension_api.json
```

Or alternatively, it seems you can generate this file yourself:

```
cd the-game
godot --dump-extension-api extension_api.json
cd ..
```

But I saw differences between the one I created, and the one in the repo. So, I'll use the one in the repo for now.

Continue...

```
cd godot-cpp
scons platform=linux -j31 custom_api_file=$(pwd)/../the-game/extension_api.json
cd ..
```

(takes about 35 seconds on my machine)

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#creating-a-simple-plugin

But I'm calling mine `the-game` instead of `demo`.

Add all the example code (.h and .cpp files).

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#compiling-the-plugin

Download the Scons file. It looks the same as the one here: `godot-cpp/test/SConstruct`
so ignore the warning
> This SConstruct file was written to be used with the latest godot-cpp master, you may need to make small changes using it with older versions or refer to the SConstruct file in the Godot 4.0 documentation.

Run 

```
scons platform=linux
```

Another 35 seconds later, I have: `the-game/bin/libgdexample.linux.template_debug.x86_64.so`

Later, when it's stable, I'll drop debug symbols with a prod build:

```
scons platform=linux target=template_release
```

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#using-the-gdextension-module

Add the GDExample node to the main.tscn scene, et voilà!

## Part 2

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#adding-properties

Add new amplitude and speed properties.

Have this new property reflect in Godot editor with:

```
rm the-game/bin/libgdexample.linux.template_debug.x86_64.so
scons platform=linux
```

Then `Project -> Reload Current Project` in the editor.

Now at this section: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_cpp_example.html#signals

Add the `position_changed` signal, then reload using the steps above (remove the .so, re-run scons, and reload the project).

Now, if you run the game, you'll see something like this in the logs:

```
The position of GDExample is now (153.6926, 191.1001)
The position of GDExample is now (190.3038, 166.3663)
The position of GDExample is now (199.328, 130.0965)
The position of GDExample is now (178.0086, 88.59532)
The position of GDExample is now (132.8584, 49.07652)
```

## Part 3: the LLM

Try https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1

Mistral announcement: https://mistral.ai/news/announcing-mistral-7b/

At the time of writing, GGUF is the recommended format to use, and the Q5_K_M model is one of TheBloke's recommended models, because it's quality los is very low. (Not sure yet what level of quality we'll need for this use-case, but hey.)

From https://huggingface.co/TheBloke/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1-GGUF/blob/main/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf

``` 
mkdir -p models
cd models
wget https://huggingface.co/TheBloke/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1-GGUF/resolve/main/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf
sha256sum mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf
# c4b062ec7f0f160e848a0e34c4e291b9e39b3fc60df5b201c038e7064dbbdcdc
cd ..
```

A test for the model is in `fine-tune/app.py`:

```
cd fine-tune
python app.py
```

It generates this using CPU:

```
{'thing': 'sketchbook', 'text': '\n\n"Wow, you\'re quite the artist!"'}
Time taken: 1.5295381546020508 seconds
{'thing': 'Xbox controller', 'text': ' "Hey, are you ready for some Gears of War 5 action?"'}
Time taken: 1.4008283615112305 seconds
{'thing': 'pencil', 'text': ' “You’re drawing the line.'}
Time taken: 0.7739419937133789 seconds
{'thing': 'banana', 'text': '\n\n"You\'re not going to use that in your game, are you?"'}
Time taken: 1.456860065460205 seconds
```

("Gears of War 5"? Ooh, we shan't be drawing the attention of the lawyers, now, shall we?)

GPU (which is quicker):

```
ggml_cuda_set_main_device: using device 0 (NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada Generation) as main device
{'thing': 'sketchbook', 'text': ' “You’re an artist!'}
Time taken: 0.26387453079223633 seconds
{'thing': 'Xbox controller', 'text': '\n\n"I see you\'re a fan of the green ring."'}
Time taken: 0.3325464725494385 seconds
{'thing': 'pencil', 'text': ' "Draw me a game!"'}
Time taken: 0.28811216354370117 seconds
{'thing': 'banana', 'text': '\n\n"What\'s the story behind this banana?"'}
Time taken: 0.29184842109680176 seconds
```

LLM stuff to look at:
- I'll experiment more with dialogue soon (for the "spicing up NPC chatter" goal)
- be mindful of not mentioning real product/people names, in case of defamation, etc
- detect GPU/AVX/AVX2 capabilities, and use them if available


# Part 4: It talks! To itself!

See the [chat transcript](chat-transcript.txt) (which is funny, because I've just finished Left Hand Of Darkness last week). The `~~~` is when I refresh the dialogue history so the context doesn't blow up.

A bit rough and ready, but run with:

```
cd fine-tune
python dialogue.py
```

# Part 4: Dialogue cleanup

OK, so it was late last night, and I didn't properly use EOS tokens, so cleaned up a lot of bot responses by hand. But it's way better now, and I've seeded the dialogue so we end up with a pair of right prepper nutters.

See the [chat transcript](chat-transcript2.txt).

It does 60 exchanges in ~50 seconds with GPU.

Remarks:
- same as before: be mindful of mentioning real product/people names
- they tend to get into a "high five" loop, where they keep starting their responses with _"Absolutely!"_, _"Let's do it!"_, etc

# Part 5: using the LLM from C++

Probably the best place to start is https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/tree/master/examples/simple

As I know GDScript better than C++, an as GDScript is kind of like Python already, it might make sense to port `dialogue.py` to GDSCript, and keep the dialogue orchestration code in GDScript.


Let's build the llama.cpp dependencies:

```
git clone https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp.git
cd llama.cpp
make
```

As it builds all the examples, we can test `main` and `simple` right now:

```
./main -m ../models/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf --prompt "Once upon a time"
./simple ../models/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf "Once upon a time"
```
It works, and it writes us a little story [using main](llamacpp-main.txt) and [using simple](llamacpp-simple.txt).

Next, try and build simple.cpp with Scons, as that's what we're using for the Godot plugin.

After piecing together the Scons file, I got it to work:

```
cd llamacpp-main-example-with-scons
scons platform=linux
./simple ../models/mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1.Q5_K_M.gguf "Once upon a time"
```

# Part 6: convert simple.cpp to GDExtension module

simple.cpp looks straightforward enough, but:
- the model will be re-used by the game code, so it makes sense to load it once, and keep it in memory
- when the game code unloads, then the destructor has to clean up

I basically made copies of gdexample.cpp and gdexample.h, and added the llama.cpp code from simple.cpp to it.

Then modified the SConstruct file to build it.

```
scons platform=linux 
```

Compilation actually worked the first time (and the [build log is here](docs/build-log-gdllm.txt)), but whether the module actually works is another matter.

And, no, it doesn't:

```
  Can't open dynamic library: /home/opyate/Documents/games/godot-llm-experiment/the-game/bin/libgdllm.linux.template_debug.x86_64.so. Error: /home/opyate/Documents/games/godot-llm-experiment/the-game/bin/libgdllm.linux.template_debug.x86_64.so: undefined symbol: llama_load_model_from_file.
  core/extension/gdextension.cpp:455 - GDExtension dynamic library not found: /home/opyate/Documents/games/godot-llm-experiment/the-game/bin/libgdllm.linux.template_debug.x86_64.so
  Failed loading resource: res://bin/gdllm.gdextension. Make sure resources have been imported by opening the project in the editor at least once.
  scene/gui/text_edit.cpp:5300 - Index p_line = -1 is out of bounds (text.size() = 2).
```

This is it: `undefined symbol: llama_load_model_from_file`.
